---
layout: post
title: Zenodo | 怒喜忧思悲恐惊
date: 2020-12-06 13:55:24.000000000
author: Shan J.
tags:
    - Adulting
    - Love story
    - Diary
---

* TOC
{:toc}

I have no idea about 2021, but this diary does help me heal and recover from SAD. This also helps me to escape from the humdrum :).

####  1102

Psalm 18:6. *I have set the Lord always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.*

https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2020-election-forecast/ Fivethrityeight forecasts that Joe Biden is favored over Trump to win the election, I still remember four years ago when I step on the Land of freedom, I was excited to see how the democratic society works, and had a full passion about pursuing a free China. However, today I am sitting here, working for the giant capital-cow, TikTok, which I have never imagined before. This is a great product, attractive while distracting, yet it also keeps from pursuing my own genuine dream.


#### 1116

All in is risky for me, especially for a girl who just made her minds to leave somebody.

#### 1117

Fighting was just like dogs. Talking can heal? Sincere?

#### 1123

`The Mother of All Demos` was introduced in 1960s and served as a blueprint for this industry.

We are all mortals.

他还说，大部分情况下，我觉得女人缺爱缺安全感情绪不稳定，有一点点烦。
她也说，而我也认为身边90%的男人又脏又懒狂妄自大，对生活品质没有半点追求。

####  1128

`Lenord Cohen`:当一个人展望世界回首生命时，唯一可言的词语便是Hallelujah.

####  1129

`春无踪迹谁知？除非问取黄鹂。百啭无人能解，因风飞过蔷薇。`

Hopefully the **ravenous** beast would not hurt me. Colloquially, everyone makes their own decision.

**Dynamic programming**

1. Recursion
2. Storage
3. Bottom-up

```python
#Recursion repetitive version 1
#Keep in mind: The list index starts with 0 in Python

from timeit import Timer

# classical factorial equation
def fact(n):
    print("factorial has been called with n = " + str(n))
    if n in (0, 1):
        return 1
    else:
        return n * fact(n-1)
print(fact(4))

#iterative_factorial
def iterative_factorial(n):
    result = 1
    for i in range(2, n+1):
        result *= i
    return result

for i in range(5):
    print("factorial with n =",i, 'result =',iterative_factorial(i))

#Fibonacci numbers old way
def fib(n):
    if n in (0, 1):
        return 1
    else:
        return fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)

for i in range(6):
    print("For n =", i, 'Fibonacci sequence is', fib(i))

#Fibonacci numbers iterative method:
def fibi(n):
    """ iterative version of the Fibonacci function """
    old, new = 0, 1
    if n == 0:
        return 0
    for i in range(0, n-1):
        old, new = new, old + new
    return new

# for i in range(1,7):
#     print(i, fibi(i))

#Frog/step problem
def num_ways(n):
    if n in (0, 1):
        return 1
    else:
        return num_ways(n-1) + num_ways(n-2)

for i in range(6):
    print('frog step is',i, num_ways(i))

#Bottom-up approach 2
def num_ways_bup(n):
    if n in (0, 1):
        return 1
    nums = [n + 1 for i in range(1, n)]
    nums.insert(0, 1)
    nums.insert(1, 1)
    for i in range(2, n+1):
        nums[i] = nums[i - 1] + nums[i - 2]
    print('nums',n, nums)
    return nums[n]

for i in range(7):
    print(i, num_ways_bup(i))
```

You don't have to repeat the

####  1201

学习南郭子綦，压力大的时候仰天而嘘。即使形如槁木，也可以抛丢怒喜忧思悲恐惊。

####  1202

人的防备心过重，是原生家庭的问题还是后天自我压抑的后果？生活之美在于什么？体验还是规训？

#### 1203

Burning out for both year-end blues and a quasi break-up.

There is always something more important than sex and money -- the original and primary impulse. Tell me about the essence of life, if I am gonna choose it, I am gonna accept the unexpected consequences. Even though it seems hard and people may do not like me.

####  1205

> Don't let the yesterday takes up too much of today. -- Will Rogers

 Fake it until you make it? Forget about the one.

#### 1206

`Sherman Alexie` wrote, "these dark times feel like those dark times."

From mass shootings and record-breaking natural disasters to divisive politics and social media burnout,

After reading Healy's blog, I get to understand that rituals can also be something manipulated, if somebody really wants to be close to you, he can access you via social media and chat with you every other day, and the whole process can be intentional yet dangerous even if he never asks or demands more than friends. I felt so lucky that I was trained in Sociology, as a fundamental lesson of Sociology is that, in the course of making everyday life seem orderly and sensible, `arbitrary things` are made to seem natural and inevitable.

> As a child in Ireland, I thought it natural to take the very body of Christ in the form of a wafer of bread on my tongue. My own boy and girl, in America, think it natural that a school is a place where you must know what to do when someone comes there to kill the children.

As a fresh graduate from shcool, the everyday night talk has deprived my personal time and illuted me into some fantasies about love, while that is not the true love, intead that is that the solitude and depression, mixed with something that I was not sure about.

To write about how rituals end, although not enough, is also teachable in social science. The answer to this question, and the way to resolve the boredem, meaninglessness, and self-deception is never a easy one. Long story short, I have to recognize that I have other ways to live my own life and it is me who have the master right to lead my life and it is only myself who can make the decision.

This approach can be surprisingly hard to take, I need to cosummate all my willingness. I do have encountered other blockers in my job and so on... because a side-effect of ritual life is that participation in it `powerfully reinforces its seeming inescapability`, even when people are uncertain or disbelieving of the sense or meaning of what is happening.
